in this video lecture we are going to
have an introductory view on power
dissipation and low power design
previously we have focused on circuit
speed when we have considered circuit
performance but speed comes at a cost
power dissipation there is dynamic power
which is dissipated in circuits at work
and there is static power dissipated in
circuits at standby in this video
lecture we're going to have a look at
how and when power is dissipated and how
have a look at some basic methods for
reducing power dissipation first some
definitions concerning energy and power
in circuit elements as you certainly
know power is drawn from voltage sources
attached to the VDD pin of a chip in
form of a current idd this power is
dissipated in resistive elements like
the MOSFETs or temporarily stored in own
chip capacitors coming from MOSFET gates
or drains and from interconnect wiring
instantaneous power as a function of
time is the product of instantaneous
current and voltage energy is the power
integrated over time the average power
is the energy divided by time and
finally energy stored in a capacitor can
be obtained by integrating this the
instantaneous power over time T until
the voltage across the capacitor reached
its final value VC so this is one-half
CV squared now let's have a look at the
dynamic power dissipation in this
inverter with a switching input voltage
V in and an output voltage V out so
input voltage V in output voltage V out
previously our focus was on the rise and
fall delays but now we are shifting
- the currents flowing during switching
these currents are idd leaving the power
supply ISS flow into ground and I load
flow into the load capacitor it was
first considered power dissipation
during a rising output when the load
capacitor is being charged current now
flows from VDD to the capacitor from the
moment when the p-channel MOSFET starts
to conduct which is when the input
voltage drops below VDD plus vtp - when
the output voltage reaches its final
value during this period i DD and I load
are equal old current is flowing from
the power supply into the capacitor the
energy needed to charge the capacitor C
load to its final value VDD is equal to
C load VDD squared you see the equations
here the energy stored in C load is
equal to half of the energy needed to
charge the capacitor the other half of
the energy was dissipated as heat in the
P channel MOSFET let's shift focus to
consider power dissipation during a
falling output when the load capacitor
is being discharged current now flows
from the capacitor to ground from the
moment when the N channel MOSFET starts
to conduct which is from when the input
voltage rises above VN until the output
voltage reaches its final value
the energy stored in the load capacitor
is now being dissipated as heat in the
n-channel MOSFET while the input voltage
is switching between states there is a
certain timeframe
TSC during which both MOSFETs are on
this leads to a blip of what we somewhat
careless occurs a short-circuit current
flowing from VDD to VSS appearing both
here in ID D is s both before rising and
falling outputs and is marginally
affecting both LED and ISS like this the
energy lost in short circuit can be
estimated from the peak short-circuit
current and the switching times TRC
leading to this expression which is
usually much smaller than the energy
needed to load to charge the load
capacitance it's about 10 percent of as
a rule of thumb of the total dynamic
energy if input and output rise and fall
times are comparable and we will
generally ignore this component of the
power dissipation dynamic power
dissipation in summary power is drawn
from the voltage source that is attached
to the VDD pins of a chip this power is
dissipated in resistive elements like
the MOSFETs or temporarily stored in
circuit node capacitors the average
power dissipation is equal to the
average energy needed during a clock
cycle T this energy is the if circuit
effective capacitance times V DD squared
to be multiplied by the clock frequency
to yield power the effective capacitance
is equal to the activity factor alpha
times C load the total circuit
capacitance of the circuit that is the
sum of all node capacitances the
activity factor is the sum of all
effective node capacitances divided by
the total circuit capacitance C load for
the activity factor alpha we can say
that for the clock distribution network
that is charged and discharged every
clock cycle the activity factor is 1 for
the input of a logic gate going high or
low during a clock cycle then alpha is
equal to 1/2 let's have a look at an
example where we have a 1 billion
transistor and we are asked to estimate
the dynamic power consumption at the
switching frequency of 1 gigahertz so on
this chip we have 50 million logic
transistors with an average which width
of 300 nanometers and an activity factor
of 10 percent there are nine hundred and
fifty million memory transistors average
width 100 nanometer and an activity
factor of two percent we assume a 1 volt
65 nanometer process and the capacitance
is 1 femto farad per micron gate
capacitance and point 8 FEM to farad per
micron diffusion capacitance from
sources and drains the total logic
capacitance 50 million transistors times
their width times the capacitance per
width 27 a no ferrars the corresponding
number for the memory 950 million
transistors 100 nanometer widths 1.8 REM
to farad per micron 179 2 farad's none
of ours the dynamic power dissipation
then is alpha logic times C logic plus
alpha memory times C memory times the
frequency times BD d squared
and we get six watts 6.1 what's the this
shows that there is a global activity
factor of six divided by two hundred
three percent this is a slide that Pat
Gelson German from Intel showed at the
international solid-state circuits
conference in 2001 it shows that power
was not much of a concern during the 70s
80s or 90s but in the new millennium
there was a clear trend that the power
density on processor chips was
increasing rapidly CPUs were already as
hot as the hot plates on the kitchen
stove and was approaching that of a
nuclear reactor a trend had to be broken
for Intel this was the start of going
multi-core the race for meeting customer
demand will higher and high clock rate
higher and higher clock rates was over
but also in general terms power
dissipation was quickly becoming a main
concern so what could be done to reduce
power dissipation we could of course
lower the power supply voltage which
would be very effective since the power
is proportional to this voltage squared
but on the other hand power gives speed
we could minimize the load capacitance
by minimizing gate capacitances fewer
stages of logic and small gate sizes we
could minimize wire capacitance by
having good floor planning to keep
communicating blocks close to each other
and careful drive of long wires using
repeaters we can also reduce the clock
frequency but again we want speed we can
reduce activity factor no unnecessary
switching
getting the most efficient way to reduce
the switching activity is to turn off
the clock to registers in unused block
this saves on the clock activity which
switching activity which is one it
eliminates all switching activity in
clock gated blocks but it requires some
enable logic determining if a block will
be used or not
so this gated clock wire is not charged
or discharged when the local clock is
blocked by the clock later we can also
reduce the supply voltage you can do
that by running different blocks in the
circuit at the lowest possible voltage
and frequency that meets performance
requirements this is the so-called multi
VDD technology the chip is divided into
different voltage domains with separate
voltage supplies two different blocks as
shown in this example where the cache
memories run on 1.2 volts while the CPU
runs on 1.0 volt one problem is that
level converters are required when
crossing from domains with low VDD 2
domains with higher VDD so here is the
VDD low and VDD high so we need this
level converter in between these blocks
the next step is to use DVS dynamic
voltage scaling where we adjust both VDD
and frequency according to workload this
requires a DVS controller that monitors
the workload and the chip temperature
this information is used to control the
clock frequency and the supply voltage
through a voltage regulator that
supplies the correct VDD to the core
logic
so far we have discussed dynamic power
dissipation but there is also static
power dissipation static power is
consumed even when chip is quietened
leakage draws power from nominally off
devices and this figure illustrates the
gate leakage drain leakage and sub
threshold leakage Junction leakage from
reverse bias PN junctions between
diffusion and substrate is usually
negligible but second-order leakage
mechanisms might be important in the
future like b2b band-to-band tunnelling
Gadol the gate induced drain leakage
when it comes to gate leakage it's an
extremely strong function of the oxide
thickness and the gate voltage it was
negligible for older processes but it
approaches sub threshold leakage at 65
nanometer and below in some processes
it's an order of magnitude less for P
Mo's than for n Mo's transistors keep
thickness of Gaetti electric at least
10.5 angstrom to prevent tunneling high
K gate dielectrics help some processes
even provide multiple oxide thicknesses
like for thicker oxides for the 3.3 volt
IO transistors and you can control a
kitchen circuits by limiting VDD finally
sub threshold leakage we're gonna have a
closer look at the sub threshold leakage
as geometries have shrunk to 65
nanometer and below libraries have
started to appear with multiple VT that
has become a common way of reducing
leakage currents and we will have a look
at how this is a semi-log plot of IDs
versus VDS it illustrates the sub
threshold
a leakage so here the MOSFET is in
strong inversion and then we have this
exponential decay down to at zero gate
voltage I off that is our sub threshold
leakage the sub threshold swing in this
case 80 millivolts per decade so one
decade for 80 millivolts change in
voltage so if we increase the threshold
voltage by eighty millivolts we will
have a decade lower sub threshold
leakage so we get a 10x reduction in the
sub threshold leakage but it comes at
the cost so in this plot we have plotted
the leakage for L level low VT standard
VT and high VT transistors and you see
that leakage decreases partisans at the
same time the propagation delay is
increasing there is also here a
relationship between the I of the sub
threshold leakage current at zero gate
voltage and the gate delay and we see
that when leakage is decreasing
gate delay increases finally we have
power gating a method for minimizing
static power dissipation by simply
turning off the power to either blocks
using sleep transistors between the
power supply and the power gated block
for power gated blocks we use a virtual
supply line v2 DV and for the we gate
the block outputs to prevent invalid
logic levels to the next block because
we cannot leave the outputs from
unpowered blocks floating the voltage
drop across sleep transistors degrades
performance during normal operation so
we must size sleep transistors wide
enough to minimize impact by
keeping the difference between the
supply voltage is small and switching
white slip transistors cost dynamic
power so it's only justified when
circuit sleeps long enough now let's
return to our textbook example and let's
have a look again at our 1 billion
transistor Gipp where we had logic block
be 50 million transistors and a memory
on-chip memory 950 million memories
transistors what would be the static
power consumption of this chip so all
MOSFETs are high VT except 5% of the
logic MOSFETs on critical timing paths
that are standard VT the leakage
information is sub threshold leakage for
standard bt 109 amps per micron high VT
10 nano amps per micron gate leakage 5
nano amps per micron and Junction
leakage we can neglect that solution the
total gate width of 1 billion MOSFETs is
110 meters distributed the total channel
width of the two and a half million
standard VT logic MOSFET 75 centimeters
total channel which of all the high VT
MOSFETs is 109 point 25 meters sub
threshold leakage assuming 50% are
turned off so we have the standard VT
leakage and the high VT leakage the
width of the standard B transistors
times its leakage the width of the high
VT transistors times the 10 times lower
leakage gives a 585 milliamps
similarly the gate leakage again
assuming 50% are turned off so we take
half of the total width of 110 meters
times the gate leakage
nano amps per micron and we get 275
milliamps adding gives us a total static
power dissipation this is the current
multiplied by the voltage 1 volt 860
millivolts and it's the distributed
logic static power is 150 millivolts
while the total memory static power is
seven hundred and ten millivolts this
860 milliwatts of static power
dissipation is about 14% of the six
point one what dynamic power that we
calculated previously and will deplete
batteries of handheld devices rapidly in
summary we have had a look at dynamic
power dissipation where the main source
is repeatedly charging the capacitive
circuit notes while logical zeros become
logical ones but we also had a look at
the blips of short-circuit current while
both pull-up and pulldown nets are on
simultaneously during switching then we
turn to static power dissipation had a
quick look at the drain Junction leakage
which is most often negligible then we
turned to a gate leakage which we in our
example found could be up to one third
of the static power and the main source
the sub threshold leakage then we turned
to low power design and asked ourselves
how can power dissipation be reduced so
we had to look at different methods
including clock gating for reducing the
switching activity multi VDD dividing
chips into voltage domains using reduced
supply voltages for non-critical blocks
DVS dynamic voltage scaling where we
monitored the workload and the
temperature for controlling VDD and the
clock frequency multi VT reducing sub
threshold voltage by using power-hungry
by using power-hungry low VT MOSFETs
only in critical timing paths
and finally power gating where we turn
power off to either blocks sending them
into sleep mode so that's it folk folks
thank you very much for listening